...continuing highlights the program. Also at
ONR, Phenon Jennings pitted our ideas and
questions against Gil Maton's organizing
ability over at the J.I. Thompson Company and gave
us Tenoch. In 1972, the Marine Technology Society
was kind enough to give me its Compass Award. In
accepting that, I could not accept it for myself,
but I did accept it in the name of the participants
in my bureauships program over 20 odd years. The
names of the persons who had some input or were
connected in some way with that program may be of
interest, and I would like to read them into the
record as I did in that speech, somewhat
geographically. Up in Canada, John Longard of the
Defense Research Establishment. In Cambridge,
Massachusetts, Charles Mongan, longtime
advisor to the sonar section. At Woods Hole,
Columbus Islin, Ed Smith, Paul Fye, Alan Vine,
Fritz Fuglista, Jerry Metcalf, Blackett Hersey,
Bud Knott, Bill Cheville, Dick Backus. to name a
few. In the New London area, at Underwater Sound
Lab, Guy Harris, Ray Hasse, Charlie Brown, Jim
Gallagher, Bob Williams, Lou Maples, Andy
Norwalk, over on the coast in the biology, Thad
Bell, John Hanrahan. At Rhode Island, Charlie and
Bobby Fish, Professor Nachi, and sometimes
Johnny Canales. At New York, in the Old Navy
Applied Science Laboratory, Dan Callis and Gene
Fisher, who later went to Annapolis and joined
Mike Stanley there. At Hudson Laboratories, yes,
we had part of the startup of that. We put half a
million dollars in it. Bob Frosh and Al Berman. At
the Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory,
Morris Ewing, John Ewing, Joe Rozelle, Bernie
Luskin, George O'Brien, Bruce Hazen, Mary
Thorpe, and Gordon Hamilton out in Bermuda. South
to Miami, skipping D.C., Walton Smith, Paul Ferry
Smith in the early days, Joe Richard, John
Steinberg, Mark Cronengall, Roger Dan, and
DeFerrara. At the Panama City Navy Laboratory,
George Austin, George Dowling, Frank Olson, and
Roy Galt's Project on the Towers. At Texas A&M
University, Dale Leeper and Luis Capuro. North
now to Seattle, Terry Hewitt gave cooperative
help. In San Francisco, Naval Shipyard Phil Green
on the design of submergence vessels. At the old
Radiological Defense Laboratory at San
Francisco, Captain D.C. Campbell, Gene Cooper,
Ed Shewitt. At Monterey,
Hank Medwin and Tavo Levastu. At San Diego, at the
Naval Undersea Center, so long leaders in this
field, Don Wilson, Gil Curl, George Anderson, Bob
Dietz, Ed Hamilton, Dave Moore, Ed Buffington,
Bob Dill, Gene LaFond, Owen Lee, Ernie Anderson,
Peter Barracos, Tyler Hansen, Eric Baham, George
Pickwell, and Carl Shipheck.
At the Arctic Severine Laboratory at San Diego,
Waldo Lyon, Alan Beale, Dick Boyle, Gene Bloom,
Jim Brown, Art Malloy, and Cyril Hopkins.
As Scripps at MPL, I mentioned the directors. Vic
Anderson may have gotten some help from us from
time to time, for the physical laboratory was a
blue ship's lab for many years. Again, those
directors, Carl Eckert, Sir Charles Wright, Al
Folk, and Fred Spies, also Leonard Lieberman,
Russell Raitt, Vic Anderson,
And over at Scripps, Margaret Robinson, and a
little advice and much help from Walter Monk, Jim
Snodgrass, Ted Folsom, and in the early days in San
Diego, Paul Hoare. The Deep Submergence group,
after their deep dive, when the project came over
to few ships, including Andy Rechnitzer, Don
Walsh, Larry Schumacher, Don Keech, George
Martin, George Mooney, Kenneth McKenzie, Art
Schlosser, Johnny Beagles, and Bruno, the
Italian who came over with Picard. Now going to the
Washington area, making no distinction between
thinkers, doers, and advisers. We again see Ross
and Bennett and Roger Lavelle, who set the ground
rules for oceanography. George Cummings, Bureau
of Ships. Hammer Richards, Brennan Potter, Ned
Shearer, Dick Williams. Red McCorkin, John
Coyle, Bill Etta, Kiri Smith, Jesse Reeves, Al
Francis Getty, Lucille Ockow, George Selkin,
John Frond, George Storr, Isidore Cook, John
Giblin, Al McQuarrie, John Huth, and Skeed
Skowski. At the Old David Taylor Model Basin, Matt
Cadrock, Manny St. Dennis, John Cramond, Charlie
Betts Snyder. At the Naval Research Laboratory,
A.J. Hiller, Chester Buchanan, Don Wilson, and
Earl Sapp for his administrative help. At the
Bureau of Naval Aeronautics, Mary Schaefer. At
the Bureau of Reps, John Ropek. And at NAV Alex, Joe
Kelly, and Lewis Nelson. At CNO and SECNAV, Wayne
Magnitsky, R.J. Alexander, Ed Snyder, Bob Frosh.
At the Oceanographer's Office, Ed Steffen, Yap
Bozeman, John Fry, Glenn Spalding. At Naval
Materials Command, Ted Wong. At the Hydrographic
Office, Dick Fleming, Ray Gordon, Boyd Olson, Tex
Treadwell, John Lyman, Tommy Austin, Charlie
Bates, Max McLean, Bob Abel, Hugh McClellan, And
last but not least, at ONR, Gordon Lill, Art
Maxwell, Don Martineau, Dick Vetter, Harold
Neal, Phelan Jennings, Max Britton, Ron
McGregor, Swede Momsen, Admiral Coates, and in
industry, Björn Mitton, Horace Tannock-Waite.
one has but to look at the own interest of each of
these people to find out something of what Bishop
was interested in and what its programs supported
to some extent, directly or indirectly. It's not
such a large list when you come to think of it. All
intimate related, all known personally to each
other because of conferences and meetings. In
fact, at one time, There was even a small inner
group of R&D based on the script classes of Dr.
Spildrup who had round robin letters each year.
And it may be of interest to read the address list of
that letter as sent out by Dale Leeper. On 3 August
1967,
that year Dale had received and reprinted and
edited forms, letters from Charles Bates, Wayne
Bate, Louis Kapoor, King Cooper, Ray Gordon, Hoji
Hidaka, Paul Hall, Willie Jacobs, Bill Keelhorn,
Gene Lafon, Art Lockley, John Lamond, J.L.
McHugh, Rodolfo Panzarini, George Picard, Bob
Bleed, Ted Sauer, Henry Stommel, Tex Treadwell,
Dick Vetter, Bill Cameron, Esther Hamel, Hector
Itcherberry, Roy Cheney, Warren Worcester, and
Dale Leeper. In addition, some 14 others had been
written but not heard from. Ernie Anderson, Bob
Arthur, Dave Carridge, John Cochran, Giff Ewing,
Pierre Groen, Douglas Inman, Johnny Canales,
Walter Monk, Morris Nieberger, June Petullo,
Donald Pritchett, Warren Thompson, and Ted
Folsom. The passing note. Any description of Dr.
H. Hughes Frederick's early classes in
oceanography should include the four Argentines
who, under Juan Peron, were sent up to study
oceanography. They were Rodolfo Panzarini,
later Admiral Panzarini, who retired as head of
the Antarctic Institute in Argentina. Iglesias,
I believe his name was Hector, I-G-L-E-S-I-S,
Iglesias, who became a naval officer. Luis
Capullo, who became Dr. Capullo, at Texas A&M and
was active in SCORE and IOC and other committees in
oceanography in Europe for so long. And Hector
Echebehere, E-T-C-H-E-B-E-H-E-R-E,
who became a naval officer and an industrialist in
Argentina. Panzerini established the first
oceanographic, or hydrographic, correctly,
hydrographic office in the Argentine Navy, and
Luis Capura was the chief of that office for a while
before he came back to Texas A&M to get his
doctorate. Also in passing, notes should be made
of the names of women who have been important in
oceanography, beginning with Mary Sears, Dr.
Mary Sears, now Woods Hole, retired, who was the
sole active assistant to Roger Revelle at the
Hydrographic Office during the war. Then June
Petullo, the late June Petullo was long a
professor at the University of Oregon at
Corvallis. Also Margaret Robinson at Scripps for
her continued long-term waking up of the
basithemograph data. and perhaps more in
sentiment because she was a student at Scripps
when I was there, Jeannie Clark, the famous girl of
fishes and shark research. Oceanographers of
today bow down with a mountain of paperwork and a
royal protocol and necessity for taking care of
prestige of different activities. Look back with
yearning and longing to the old underwater sound
propagation committee chaired by Beckett
Hershey. With no regular meeting places, but
always bringing the top people into the field and
together for an informal discussion and review of
their programs in the morning. and in the
afternoon, usually a determination of the
priorities and decisions of the program to be
carried out for the rest of the year. The funding
was taken care of by the different aid activities
and was not a major portion of the committee's
business. In other words, if Fred Spieth said that
he had a vehicle which could pursue a certain type
of research better than Lamont, Fred Spieth, MPL,
would go ahead and do it, and Lamont would do
something else with its money. But the ease with
which discussions were made and priorities
established under this completely informal
committee work and the able chairman of Brackett
Hersey was a delight to all who remember those
meetings. The nearest thing to it while the
three-day meetings at Our Head Lake in the
fisheries area under O.E. Seti called the Epoch
Committee. With the passing of those days, life
has become much less joyous to the
oceanographers. Captain T.K. Treadmill at Texas
A&M and others should be questioned for the
history of the development of the oceanographic
class of ships which the Navy built. Early after
the war, a relatively large number of small
military ships were converted for use by the
laboratories, beginning with the San Pablo and
the Rehoboth, the converted seaplane tenders of
the Hydrographic Office.
The funding of the conversions, the choice of the
ships, the priorities given to work, And the final
design and building of oceanographic vessels by
the Navy itself, the AGOR class, should be looked
into very carefully because it was, while the
money lasted, a very important vehicle means of
getting the oceanographers to sea. And it
permitted the multi-ship operation
investigations which became so important later
on in the International Geophysical Year and
other efforts of that kind. A somewhat unique
cruise stemming directly from the World War II
type of research was the Madea Expedition. in
which oceanographers and acousticians and their
acoustic laboratories under the direction of Bob
Frasch at the then existing Hudson Laboratories
of the University of Columbia, New York,
combined the talents of two great groups and the
gathering of the information each needed. Any
history should cover the expeditions of the 1950s
and 60s with as much interest and accurate detail
as has been given to the Challenger, the Meteor,
and the other classical expeditions in the past.
It is with great pride that I read into this record
in passing Names of the members of this ilk who were
present at the retirement luncheon for King
Cooper on 12 January 1972, given by Assistant
Secretary of the Navy, R&D Bob Price, in the
Pentagon. I read them, their names and their
titles as they were given. Mr. Richard Betta,
Ocean Affairs Board, Executive Secretary of the
National Academy of Sciences. Dr. Hugh
McClellan, International Decade of Ocean
Exploration Office, National Science
Foundation. Dr. Gordon Lill, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration, Department of
Commerce. Mr. Robert Abel, Director, Sea Grant
Program, NOAA, Department of Commerce,
Rockville, Maryland. Dr. Gerald Warzel,
Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory of
Columbia University, New York. Dr. Arthur E.
Maxwell, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution,
Woods Hole. Dr. Robert E. Frasch, Assistant
Secretary of the Navy for Research and
Development. Mr. Gordon Hamilton,
Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory. Mr.
John R. Ewing, Lamont Doherty Geological
Observatory, Mr. Kerry D. Smith, Sonar
Technology Division, Naval Ship Systems Command
Headquarters, Mr. Alan Ryan, Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution, Dr. Eugene Lafon,
Naval Undersea Research and Development Center,
San Diego, Dr. Maurice Ewing, Director, Lamont
Doherty Geological Observatory, Dr. J. Brackett
Hersey, Office of Naval Research, Rail Admiral
R.C. Gooding, Vice Commander, Naval Ship Systems
Command, Dr. Donald P. Martino,
M-A-R-T-I-N-E-A-U, NOAA, Department of
Commerce, Mr. Phelan Jennings, International
Decade Oceanographic Exploration Office,
National Science Foundation, Commander Don
Walsh, U.S. Navy, Captain Donald L. Keech, U.S.
Navy, Deputy Director for Navy Laboratories, and
Mr. Henry O'Neill, Ocean Science and Technology
Division, Office of Naval Research. It takes a
very small stretch of the imagination. to see what
my pride at having such attendance and what it
meant to me. Another tidbit before I forget it. I
can state on personal knowledge that the true
developer and the true inventor Now the
expendable bathy thermograph, which is now used
in such great quantities, was due to the work of Jim
Snodgrass at Scripps. This and many other things
he has contributed as a story all of its own, but in
this particular case, there was on record a letter
which I once wrote him asking why we couldn't
develop a sinking device which would be picked up
by a surface-towed acoustic receiver which would
give the temperature at the different depths as
the device sank. And Snodgrass came back with the
information that the signal noise due to water
transmission was so great that what we should use
would be a wire which would give a connection to the
power unit that was sinking or the signaling unit
that was sinking. Sometime later, Mr. Graham, I
believe his name is. And I had a calendar reference
memo of it, visited the bureauships, and forced
that they can. And I said, go see Jim Snodgrass.
They went out to see Jim Snodgrass. O&R, through
some mishap, had lost Snodgrass's patent
application. And as the thing worked out, the
Supercarrying Company won the suit for patent
rights on the expandable bathymograph. But all of
that happened after Jim Snodgrass had
interviewed them and told them of his idea This is
the way I see it and the way I believe it truly
happened. Stop. Likewise, another milestone
instrument development was due and accredited to
BUSHIP's funding on the original report from
Morris Ewing's Lamont. Dorothy Geological
Observatory. Under Ewing's direction, Bernard
Ruskin
developed the Precision Depth Recorder,
incorporating Ewing's original ideas of a tuning
fork control of frequency. The ship's generators
varied so much that the The distance measurement
deduced from the time measurement was an error,
but by using a tuning fork and developing the
recorder which Leskin and Ewing developed, they
were able to get the precision to something like
six feet out of 18,000.
and was the beginning of the accurate bottom
mapping which has come out so beautifully in the
interpretations of Bruce Hazen who was at Lamont.
Stop. One more word. The precision graphic
recorder developed at Woods Hole using a
different type of recording paper and being
programmed in order to get recordings from
different regions and layers of the water column,
also received bureauship's funding, but has
always been claimed as an ONR development.
However, the precision depth recorder of Luskin
and Ewing preceded the one developed by Hersey and
Brednott at Woods Hole. Stop.